# Information theory and category hierarchy

This repository contains code and data for Khishigsuren, Mollica, and Kemp, Information theory predicts that superordinates emerge before basic-level categories.

## Folder structure

#### analysis
This folder contains analysis scripts.

#### data
This folder contains processed data needed for analyses.

#### output
Figures, tables and results files generated by the analysis scripts.

#### preprocessing
Code for preprocessing the data.

#### rawdata
This folder contains downloaded data.

## Installing R Libraries 

From within R, run

`> renv::restore()`

to install packages used by the code in this repository.

## Python version

This code was developed using Python 3.14. See `requirements.txt` for a full specification of the environment used.

## Downloading other large files

Large files not uploaded to this repository need to be downloaded from [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19268233). This folder contains the following files.

  * `data` : includes contextual probability estimates from the T5 model

  * `rawdata` : includes the BNC and Leuven datasets

Files must be placed in their corresponding directories (i.e., contents of `data` in the `data` folder, and contents of `rawdata` in the `rawdata` folder) to reproduce the analyses.

## Reproducing results

To reproduce tables and figures in the manuscript, follow the steps below.

1) Run `01_prepare_frequency.R` in the `preprocessing` folder to prepare frequency datasets.

2) Run `02_prepare_features.R` in the `preprocessing` folder to prepare feature datasets.

3) Run `03_parse_sentences.ipynb` in the `preprocessing` folder to extract sentences that contain target words from BNC corpus.

4) Run `04_disambiguate_senses.ipynb` in the `preprocessing` folder to disambiguate senses for the target words in those sentences. It took about 15 hours for the code to finish running on Google Vertex AI.

5) Run `05_parse_more_sentences.ipynb` in the `preprocessing` folder to extract more prior context for previously identified sentences that contain literal senses of the target words from BNC corpus.

6) Run `06_estimate_context_probs.py` in the `preprocessing` folder to estimate contextual probabilities using T5 model. It took about 12 hours for the code to finish running on the High Performance Computing system at the University of Melbourne, using 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. 

7) Run `07_combine_feature_frequency.R` in the `preprocessing` folder to combine feature and frequency datasets.

8) Run `01_corter_gluck_model.Rmd` in the `analysis` folder to implement feature-based parameter sweep using Corter and Gluck theory. It produces Figure 5 in the manuscript.

9) Run `02_empirical_analysis.Rmd` in the `analysis` folder to implement empirical analyses on Rosch and Leuven datasets. It produces Tables 1-2 and A1-A2 in the manuscript.

10) Run `03_nonling_context_leuven.R` in the `analysis` folder to compute gain differences based on assumptions of non-linguistic context using Leuven data. It needs to be run from the command line to enable parallel processing. It took about an hour and a half for the code to finish running.

11) Run `04_nonling_context_rosch.Rmd` in the `analysis` folder to compute gain differences based on assumptions of non-linguistic context using Rosch data. It produces Figures 8-10 in the manuscript.

12) Run `05_LLM_analysis_features.R` in the `analysis` folder to compute gains based on features and LLM-derived probabilities (Leuven only). It needs to be run from the command line to enable parallel processing. It took about 6 hours for the code to finish running.

13) Run `06_LLM_analysis_identity.Rmd` in the `analysis` folder to compute gains based on identity and LLM-derived probabilities (Leuven only). It produces Figure 11 and Tables 4, D1 and D2 in the manuscript.


